Brief:
I am an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at The
University of Chicago, where I research topics related to data: how it affects
us, what is its value, and how can we make better use of it. To do that, I do
conceptual work but also a lot of hands-on systems research. 

Shorter:
I am an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at The
University of Chicago, where I am also on the Committee on Data Science. I am
interested in all things data. My research agenda, data ecology, explores how
data affects our technological, economic, social, and cultural ecosystems. We
study ecosystems via dataflows and propose interventions--- primarily technical,
but also economic, social, and others---to control dataflows so we extract the
value of data while avoiding its potential harm. I did my PhD at Imperial
College London and a postdoc at MIT. I joined UChicago in 2020.

Short:
I am an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at The
University of Chicago, where I am also on the Committee on Data Science. I am
interested in all things data. My research agenda, data ecology, explores how
data affects our technological, economic, social, and cultural ecosystems. We
study ecosystems via dataflows and propose interventions--- primarily technical,
but also economic, social, and others---to control dataflows so we extract the
value of data while avoiding its potential harm. In addition, I am interested in
designing and implementing systems for data discovery and processing. I received
a SIGMOD'23 Test-of-Time Award, an NSF CAREER in 2024, and I was named a Sloan
Research Fellow in 2025. After doing my PhD at Imperial College London (in
distributed data processing) I did a postdoc at MIT (in data discovery). I
joined UChicago in 2020. I thank everyone who makes our research possible,
including DSI@UChicago, the Department of Economics at UChicago, NSF, and
industrial gifts. 

Long:
Links to PDFs <TBD>
